Project/README_m2.md, before:

# Milestone 2: Profiling Convolution and Implementing Kernel Fusion
***Deadline: November 7th, 2025 8PM***

In this second milestone, you will build upon the **basic CPU convolution and GPU convolution** you completed in Milestone 1. Your tasks now include implementing  **profiling** those implementations, matrix unrolling, and introducing a **kernel fusion** optimization for unrolling.

Before starting Milestone 2, please watch the recorded profiling lecture available on the Canvas syllabus page. Although there is a profiling lecture scheduled for Week 9, you can view this recorded one at any time.

## Table of Contents
- [Milestone 2: Profiling Convolution and Implementing Kernel Fusion](#milestone-2-profiling-convolution-and-implementing-kernel-fusion)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Overview and Deliverables](#overview-and-deliverables)
    - [Deliverables](#deliverables)
  - [Setup](#setup)
  - [1. Profiling Basic CPU Convolution](#1-profiling-basic-cpu-convolution)
  - [2. Input Feature Unrolling](#2-input-feature-unrolling)
  - [3. Profiling Basic GPU Convolution and Matrix Unrolling](#3-profiling-basic-gpu-convolution-and-matrix-unrolling)
    - [Using Nsight-Systems and Nsight-Compute](#using-nsight-systems-and-nsight-compute)
  - [4. Implementing Kernel Fusion](#4-implementing-kernel-fusion)
  - [5. Profile Kernel Fusion](#5-profile-kernel-fusion)
  - [6. Submitting Milestone 2 for Grading](#6-submitting-milestone-2-for-grading)
  - [Rubric](#rubric)
  - [Appendix](#appendix)
    - [Checking for Errors](#checking-for-errors)



## Overview and Deliverables

For Milestone 2, you will:

1. **Profile** the CPU convolution using gprof.
2. **Profile** the basic GPU convolution from milestone 1 using Nsight tools (nsys and ncu).
3. **Implement an Unrolled Convolution** approach, which unrolls the convolution operation into matrix multiplication.
4. **Profile** the unrolled implementation using Nsight tools (nsys and ncu).
5. **Implement a new Kernel Fusion** approach, which fuses unrolling, matrix multiplication, and result permutation into one kernel.
6. **Profile** fused kernel using Nsight tools (nsys and ncu).

### Deliverables
| Deliverable                    | Description                                                                      |
| ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **1. Implement unrolling** | Unroll inputs to turn convolution into matrix multiplication.   |
| **2. Implement kernel fusion** | Fuse unrolling + matrix multiplication + permutation into a single GPU kernel.   |
| **3. Conduct profiling and complete the report**     | Complete a quiz-style report on PrairieLearn using your profiling results        |
| **4. Submit code for grading** | See [Submitting Milestone 2 for Grading](#4-submitting-milestone-2-for-grading). |

You will edit the following file for milestone 2.
```
project/src/layer/custom/kernel-fusion-forward.cu
```

**Only modify the files specifically mentioned in this document. Changes to other files will not be used for grading, and may cause unexpected errors that you will be responsible for.**

## Setup

1. **Pull the latest project updates** (if any) into your local repository.
2. To compile, run:
   ```bash
   ./run.sh build
   ```
   This will compile everything, including a binary (e.g., `m2_unroll` and/or `m2_fused`) for this milestone.
3. To execute your code, run (or edit the `.slurm` script to run):
   ```bash
   sbatch m2_unroll.slurm
   ```
   The `m2_fused` binary is intended for kernel fusion. The `m2_unroll` binary is for the unrolled, un-fused convolution.
4. To clean, run:
   ```bash
   ./run.sh clean
   ```
   This removes all compiled artifacts.

**Important:** If you are on a cluster (like Delta), use the appropriate Slurm commands (`srun`, `sbatch`) rather than running locally.


## 1. Profiling Basic CPU Convolution

In Milestone 1, you wrote a CPU implementation in a file similar to `cpu-new-forward.cc` (the function `conv_forward_cpu`). Now, you will **profile** that CPU version.

1. Compile with `-pg` flag in `run.sh`. Edit the following line.

    Original:
    ```bash
    cmake ./project/ && make -j8
    ```

    Updated:
    ```bash
    cmake -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-pg ./project/ && make -j8
    ```
2. Use Gprof to profile your CPU implementation for batch size of 1k.

    You will use `gprof` to profile the execution of your CPU forward convolution implementation.

    Compiling and linking your `cpu-new-forward.cc` with the `-pg` flag in the file `run.sh` will create a `gmon.out` artifact containing profile information when the binary `m1_cpu` is executed.  To analyze this information in human readable form, modify `m1_cpu.slurm` and modify the line to redirect `gprof` output as `outfile`.

        srun ./m1_cpu 1000 && gprof -Q ./m1_cpu gmon.out > outfile

    By default, `gprof` prints both a flat profile and a call graph (see "Interpreting gprof's Output" in the [GNU gprof Documentation](https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/gprof/index.html)).  With the `-Q` flag, we only print the flat profile.  The information you need can be found near the beginning of `gprof`'s output. You can download your build folder and process the output `outfile` with `grep` (with your function's name) or `head`. You can also open it with a text editor if you want to examine the complete output.

3. Remove `-pg` flag in `run.sh` when you finish CPU profiling. It will slow down your program significantly.

## 2. Input Feature Unrolling

In lecture, we learned how to use matrix multiplication to implement convolution. In order to do so, we need to unroll the input features. Modify `./project/src/layer/custom/unroll-new-forward.cu` to complete the GPU convolution implementation with matrix multiplication.

The convolution forward process consists of the following steps:
- Unroll the input matrix
- Perform matrix multiplication
- Permute the result of the matrix multiplication.

In lecture 11, we covered how to unroll the input features for a single image. To unroll a batch of images, the unrolled matrix for each image in the batch should be concatenated along the row dimension. In other words, if the unrolled matrix of a single image has a shape of `H` x `W`, then the unrolled matrix of a batch of images would have a shape of `H` x `Batch * W`.

The correct size of the unrolled matrix is `Channel * K * K` x `Batch * Height_out * Width_out`. Be aware that when the batch size is 10,000, the unrolled matrix's size exceeds `INT_MAX`. Consider using `size_t` for indexing.

Then, you will view the mask as a `Map_out` x `Channel * K * K` matrix, and multiply it with the unrolled matrix. The output feature map initially has the shape `Map_out` x `Batch` x `Height_out` x `Width_out`, which needs to be permuted to `Batch` x `Map_out` x `Height_out` x `Width_out`.

The matrix multiplication kernel and the permute kernel are provided. You will focus on implementing the input matrix unrolling kernel.

To sum up, your task is to:
- Implement the `matrix_unrolling_kernel` .
- Complete host code in `conv_forward_gpu_prolog`, `conv_forward_gpu`, and `conv_forward_gpu_epilog`.

Same to the basic GPU implementation, `m2_unroll` takes a command-line argument batch size. For example, in `m2_unroll.slurm`, the line

```bash
srun ./m2_unroll 100 > m2_unroll.out
```

runs the code specified in `./project/src/layer/custom/unroll-new-forward.cu` program for a batch of 100 input images.

If your implementation is correct, it will show the same accuracy as previous implementations.

The sum of Op times on batch_size=10000 should be approximately 200 ms. You must have correct accuracies and total Op time less than 1200 ms to earn full credits on the coding part. Note that input unroll operations may have longer execution times - this will be optimized in milestone 2.

The provided code for matrix multiplication and permutation must remain unmodified. During grading, we will evaluate the unrolling result inside the matrix multiplication kernel declared in `matmul.h`. Any modifications to this code, such as implementing your own matrix multiplication kernel, may result in a loss of points.

## 3. Profiling Basic GPU Convolution and Matrix Unrolling

We now have two convolution kernels we can compare. It's time to collect in-depth performance information.

The following instructions will use `m1_gpu` as an example to demonstrate the profiling process. Matrix unroll should be profiled in the same way, but the `m2_unroll` binary should be used instead.

You will use the profiling results to complete the report.

### Using Nsight-Systems and Nsight-Compute

**Before you do any profiling, make sure your implementation achieves desired accuracy. Also make sure you do not have any memory errors by running `compute-sanitizer`. See [Checking for Errors](#appendix) on how to run this.**

***System level profiling using Nsight-Systems***

We will learn how to use `nsys` (Nsight Systems) to profile the execution at the application level.

Once you've gotten the appropriate accuracy results, generate a profile using `nsys`.
You have to remove `-DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-pg` in `run.sh` and make line of your `run.sh`:

    cmake ./project/ && make -j8

Then, modify `m1_gpu.slurm` to generate a profile instead of just executing the code. The output is inside `profile.out` file.

    srun nsys profile --stats=true ./m1_gpu > profile.out

You should see something that looks like the following (but not identical):

```bash
......

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Num Calls    Avg (ns)      Med (ns)     Min (ns)   Max (ns)    StdDev (ns)          Name
 --------  ---------------  ---------  ------------  -------------  --------  -----------  -----------  ---------------------
     99.9  351,122,724,860      3,519  99,779,120.4  100,089,303.0     2,855  100,130,281  5,413,528.2  poll
      0.1      283,382,530        925     306,359.5       14,207.0     1,051   20,208,549  1,050,067.9  ioctl
     ......
      0.0            1,913          1       1,913.0        1,913.0     1,913        1,913          0.0  bind

[5/8] Executing 'cudaapisum' stats report

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Num Calls    Avg (ns)     Med (ns)    Min (ns)   Max (ns)    StdDev (ns)            Name
 --------  ---------------  ---------  ------------  -----------  --------  -----------  ------------  ----------------------
     ......

[6/8] Executing 'gpukernsum' stats report

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Instances    Avg (ns)      Med (ns)     Min (ns)    Max (ns)   StdDev (ns)      GridXYZ         BlockXYZ                                               Name
 --------  ---------------  ---------  ------------  ------------  ----------  ----------  -----------  ---------------  --------------  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     ......

[7/8] Executing 'gpumemtimesum' stats report

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Count    Avg (ns)       Med (ns)      Min (ns)     Max (ns)    StdDev (ns)       Operation
 --------  ---------------  -----  -------------  -------------  -----------  -----------  ------------  ------------------
     ......

[8/8] Executing 'gpumemsizesum' stats report

 Total (MB)  Count  Avg (MB)  Med (MB)  Min (MB)  Max (MB)   StdDev (MB)      Operation
 ----------  -----  --------  --------  --------  ---------  -----------  ------------------
     ......

```

The CUDA API Statistics section shows the CUDA API calls that are executed. The CUDA Kernel Statistics lists all the kernels that were executed during the profiling session. There are also more details on the CUDA memory operations (CudaMemcpy) listed.
There are columns corresponding to percentage of time consumed, total time, number of calls, and average/min/max time of those calls. Use **your** `nsys` profiling output corresponding to the section above to answer the questions for your quiz.

You can find more information about `nsys` in the [Nsight Systems Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/#cli-profiling)

***Kernel level profiling using Nsight-Compute***

When doing profiling tasks with Nsight-Compute, modify your SLURM configuration as follows:

```bash
#SBATCH --constraint="projects,perf,nvperf"
```

For regular development and debugging, use the standard configuration:

```bash
#SBATCH --constraint="projects"
```

**Note:** Only use the profiling configuration when actively collecting performance metrics. The `perf,nvperf` constraints instruct Delta to reserve a dedicated 4×A40 node for your job. This ensures that no other processes interfere with profiling but may result in longer wait times for node allocation. Using the standard configuration during development helps maintain resource availability for other cluster users by avoiding unnecessary exclusive node allocation.

Nsight-Systems does not give you detailed kernel level performance metrics. For that, we will need to use `ncu` (Nsight-Compute).

1. Modify `m1_gpu.slurm` to use `ncu` to save some timeline and analysis information.
   ```bash
   srun ncu --set full -f -o analysis_file ./m1_gpu 100 > gpu_ncu.out
   ```
   This generates `analysis_file.ncu-rep`.
2. Download that `.ncu-rep` file locally to open in the **Nsight Compute GUI**.
3. Examine memory behavior, SM efficiency, etc. to find performance bottlenecks.

You can find more information about `ncu` in the [Nsight Compute Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightCompute/index.html)

## 4. Implementing Kernel Fusion

Modify `./project/src/layer/custom/kernel-fusion-forward.cu` to create the kernel fusion implementation of input unrolling.

**Kernel Fusion** fuses the matrix unrolling kernel, the matrix multiplication kernel, and the permutation kernel into **one** kernel. This technique is covered as "Matrix-Multiplication with built-in unrolling" in the lecture. Below is a more detailed explanation of this technique.

The implementation starts with the tiled matrix multiplication kernel. You can refer to your lab3 code or `./project/src/layer/custom/matmul.cu`.
- When loading input elements into shared memory, instead of reading from a pre-unrolled matrix, the kernel directly loads the corresponding elements from the original input feature.
- After computing the output element, the kernel writes it to global memory. At this stage, it directly stores the results in the correct positions, applying the necessary permutation.

The skeleton code is provided, and the places you need to complete are marked with `TODO`.

## 5. Profile Kernel Fusion
Follow the instructions from step 3 (Profiling Basic GPU Convolution and Matrix Unrolling) to profile your fused kernel using Nsight Systems/Compute. Compare the time consumed by the fused version vs. your separate-kernel approach. You will use the profiling results to complete the report.

The sum of Op times on batch_size=10000 should be approximately 60 ms if you implement the fused kernel correctly. To earn full credits on the coding part, you must
- have correct accuracies for any batch size
- achieve total Op time less than 200 ms for batch_size=10000
- use tiled matrix multiplication

We will measure Op times without profiling. When verifying performance, you can use results from non-profiling runs or `nsys` profiling, as `ncu` profiling introduces significant overhead.

## 6. Submitting Milestone 2 for Grading

To submit your work for grading, add, commit, and push your files:

* ```git add -u```
* ```git commit -m "some comment"```
* ```git push origin main```

Do not add profiling results (`.sqlite`, `.nsys-rep`, `.ncu-rep`) to Git. These files are not required for code grading and are often large, potentially exceeding GitHub’s size limit. Including them may prevent you from successfully pushing your commit.

Make sure to complete your quiz on PrairieLearn. Double check you finish all items listed in the Deliverables for this milestone.

The code in your GitHub repository at 8pm on Monday, April 14 will be considered the final version, even if you had a correct version earlier. We will retrieve and grade the code at that time.

## Rubric
| Component | Percentage |
| --------- | ---------: |
| **Unrolling**  |        10% |
| **Fusion**  |        10% |
| **Quiz**  |        15% |


## Appendix

### Checking for Errors

To ensure proper memory management, we must free all allocated memory upon completion fo the program. To avoid memory errors, you can use `compute-sanitizer`, a tool provided by NVIDIA to catch memory bugs. It succeeds the now-deprecated `CUDA-memcheck` tool.
To check for memory errors in the Milestone 1 GPU binary, update your slurm script to include the following command. For other milestones, change the binary name accordingly:
```
srun compute-sanitizer m1_gpu 100 > m1_gpu.out
```

Commit message:

Update README for Milestone 2 file modifications
Add unrolling code file into the deliverables section

Project/README_m2.md, after:

# Milestone 2: Profiling Convolution and Implementing Kernel Fusion
***Deadline: November 7th, 2025 8PM***

In this second milestone, you will build upon the **basic CPU convolution and GPU convolution** you completed in Milestone 1. Your tasks now include implementing  **profiling** those implementations, matrix unrolling, and introducing a **kernel fusion** optimization for unrolling.

Before starting Milestone 2, please watch the recorded profiling lecture available on the Canvas syllabus page. Although there is a profiling lecture scheduled for Week 9, you can view this recorded one at any time.

## Table of Contents
- [Milestone 2: Profiling Convolution and Implementing Kernel Fusion](#milestone-2-profiling-convolution-and-implementing-kernel-fusion)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Overview and Deliverables](#overview-and-deliverables)
    - [Deliverables](#deliverables)
  - [Setup](#setup)
  - [1. Profiling Basic CPU Convolution](#1-profiling-basic-cpu-convolution)
  - [2. Input Feature Unrolling](#2-input-feature-unrolling)
  - [3. Profiling Basic GPU Convolution and Matrix Unrolling](#3-profiling-basic-gpu-convolution-and-matrix-unrolling)
    - [Using Nsight-Systems and Nsight-Compute](#using-nsight-systems-and-nsight-compute)
  - [4. Implementing Kernel Fusion](#4-implementing-kernel-fusion)
  - [5. Profile Kernel Fusion](#5-profile-kernel-fusion)
  - [6. Submitting Milestone 2 for Grading](#6-submitting-milestone-2-for-grading)
  - [Rubric](#rubric)
  - [Appendix](#appendix)
    - [Checking for Errors](#checking-for-errors)



## Overview and Deliverables

For Milestone 2, you will:

1. **Profile** the CPU convolution using gprof.
2. **Profile** the basic GPU convolution from milestone 1 using Nsight tools (nsys and ncu).
3. **Implement an Unrolled Convolution** approach, which unrolls the convolution operation into matrix multiplication.
4. **Profile** the unrolled implementation using Nsight tools (nsys and ncu).
5. **Implement a new Kernel Fusion** approach, which fuses unrolling, matrix multiplication, and result permutation into one kernel.
6. **Profile** fused kernel using Nsight tools (nsys and ncu).

### Deliverables
| Deliverable                    | Description                                                                      |
| ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **1. Implement unrolling** | Unroll inputs to turn convolution into matrix multiplication.   |
| **2. Implement kernel fusion** | Fuse unrolling + matrix multiplication + permutation into a single GPU kernel.   |
| **3. Conduct profiling and complete the report**     | Complete a quiz-style report on PrairieLearn using your profiling results        |
| **4. Submit code for grading** | See [Submitting Milestone 2 for Grading](#4-submitting-milestone-2-for-grading). |

You will edit the following files for milestone 2.
```
project/src/layer/custom/kernel-fusion-forward.cu
project/src/layer/custom/unroll-new-forward.cu
```

**Only modify the files specifically mentioned in this document. Changes to other files will not be used for grading, and may cause unexpected errors that you will be responsible for.**

## Setup

1. **Pull the latest project updates** (if any) into your local repository.
2. To compile, run:
   ```bash
   ./run.sh build
   ```
   This will compile everything, including a binary (e.g., `m2_unroll` and/or `m2_fused`) for this milestone.
3. To execute your code, run (or edit the `.slurm` script to run):
   ```bash
   sbatch m2_unroll.slurm
   ```
   The `m2_fused` binary is intended for kernel fusion. The `m2_unroll` binary is for the unrolled, un-fused convolution.
4. To clean, run:
   ```bash
   ./run.sh clean
   ```
   This removes all compiled artifacts.

**Important:** If you are on a cluster (like Delta), use the appropriate Slurm commands (`srun`, `sbatch`) rather than running locally.


## 1. Profiling Basic CPU Convolution

In Milestone 1, you wrote a CPU implementation in a file similar to `cpu-new-forward.cc` (the function `conv_forward_cpu`). Now, you will **profile** that CPU version.

1. Compile with `-pg` flag in `run.sh`. Edit the following line.

    Original:
    ```bash
    cmake ./project/ && make -j8
    ```

    Updated:
    ```bash
    cmake -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-pg ./project/ && make -j8
    ```
2. Use Gprof to profile your CPU implementation for batch size of 1k.

    You will use `gprof` to profile the execution of your CPU forward convolution implementation.

    Compiling and linking your `cpu-new-forward.cc` with the `-pg` flag in the file `run.sh` will create a `gmon.out` artifact containing profile information when the binary `m1_cpu` is executed.  To analyze this information in human readable form, modify `m1_cpu.slurm` and modify the line to redirect `gprof` output as `outfile`.

        srun ./m1_cpu 1000 && gprof -Q ./m1_cpu gmon.out > outfile

    By default, `gprof` prints both a flat profile and a call graph (see "Interpreting gprof's Output" in the [GNU gprof Documentation](https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/gprof/index.html)).  With the `-Q` flag, we only print the flat profile.  The information you need can be found near the beginning of `gprof`'s output. You can download your build folder and process the output `outfile` with `grep` (with your function's name) or `head`. You can also open it with a text editor if you want to examine the complete output.

3. Remove `-pg` flag in `run.sh` when you finish CPU profiling. It will slow down your program significantly.

## 2. Input Feature Unrolling

In lecture, we learned how to use matrix multiplication to implement convolution. In order to do so, we need to unroll the input features. Modify `./project/src/layer/custom/unroll-new-forward.cu` to complete the GPU convolution implementation with matrix multiplication.

The convolution forward process consists of the following steps:
- Unroll the input matrix
- Perform matrix multiplication
- Permute the result of the matrix multiplication.

In lecture 11, we covered how to unroll the input features for a single image. To unroll a batch of images, the unrolled matrix for each image in the batch should be concatenated along the row dimension. In other words, if the unrolled matrix of a single image has a shape of `H` x `W`, then the unrolled matrix of a batch of images would have a shape of `H` x `Batch * W`.

The correct size of the unrolled matrix is `Channel * K * K` x `Batch * Height_out * Width_out`. Be aware that when the batch size is 10,000, the unrolled matrix's size exceeds `INT_MAX`. Consider using `size_t` for indexing.

Then, you will view the mask as a `Map_out` x `Channel * K * K` matrix, and multiply it with the unrolled matrix. The output feature map initially has the shape `Map_out` x `Batch` x `Height_out` x `Width_out`, which needs to be permuted to `Batch` x `Map_out` x `Height_out` x `Width_out`.

The matrix multiplication kernel and the permute kernel are provided. You will focus on implementing the input matrix unrolling kernel.

To sum up, your task is to:
- Implement the `matrix_unrolling_kernel` .
- Complete host code in `conv_forward_gpu_prolog`, `conv_forward_gpu`, and `conv_forward_gpu_epilog`.

Same to the basic GPU implementation, `m2_unroll` takes a command-line argument batch size. For example, in `m2_unroll.slurm`, the line

```bash
srun ./m2_unroll 100 > m2_unroll.out
```

runs the code specified in `./project/src/layer/custom/unroll-new-forward.cu` program for a batch of 100 input images.

If your implementation is correct, it will show the same accuracy as previous implementations.

The sum of Op times on batch_size=10000 should be approximately 200 ms. You must have correct accuracies and total Op time less than 1200 ms to earn full credits on the coding part. Note that input unroll operations may have longer execution times - this will be optimized in milestone 2.

The provided code for matrix multiplication and permutation must remain unmodified. During grading, we will evaluate the unrolling result inside the matrix multiplication kernel declared in `matmul.h`. Any modifications to this code, such as implementing your own matrix multiplication kernel, may result in a loss of points.

## 3. Profiling Basic GPU Convolution and Matrix Unrolling

We now have two convolution kernels we can compare. It's time to collect in-depth performance information.

The following instructions will use `m1_gpu` as an example to demonstrate the profiling process. Matrix unroll should be profiled in the same way, but the `m2_unroll` binary should be used instead.

You will use the profiling results to complete the report.

### Using Nsight-Systems and Nsight-Compute

**Before you do any profiling, make sure your implementation achieves desired accuracy. Also make sure you do not have any memory errors by running `compute-sanitizer`. See [Checking for Errors](#appendix) on how to run this.**

***System level profiling using Nsight-Systems***

We will learn how to use `nsys` (Nsight Systems) to profile the execution at the application level.

Once you've gotten the appropriate accuracy results, generate a profile using `nsys`.
You have to remove `-DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-pg` in `run.sh` and make line of your `run.sh`:

    cmake ./project/ && make -j8

Then, modify `m1_gpu.slurm` to generate a profile instead of just executing the code. The output is inside `profile.out` file.

    srun nsys profile --stats=true ./m1_gpu > profile.out

You should see something that looks like the following (but not identical):

```bash
......

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Num Calls    Avg (ns)      Med (ns)     Min (ns)   Max (ns)    StdDev (ns)          Name
 --------  ---------------  ---------  ------------  -------------  --------  -----------  -----------  ---------------------
     99.9  351,122,724,860      3,519  99,779,120.4  100,089,303.0     2,855  100,130,281  5,413,528.2  poll
      0.1      283,382,530        925     306,359.5       14,207.0     1,051   20,208,549  1,050,067.9  ioctl
     ......
      0.0            1,913          1       1,913.0        1,913.0     1,913        1,913          0.0  bind

[5/8] Executing 'cudaapisum' stats report

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Num Calls    Avg (ns)     Med (ns)    Min (ns)   Max (ns)    StdDev (ns)            Name
 --------  ---------------  ---------  ------------  -----------  --------  -----------  ------------  ----------------------
     ......

[6/8] Executing 'gpukernsum' stats report

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Instances    Avg (ns)      Med (ns)     Min (ns)    Max (ns)   StdDev (ns)      GridXYZ         BlockXYZ                                               Name
 --------  ---------------  ---------  ------------  ------------  ----------  ----------  -----------  ---------------  --------------  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     ......

[7/8] Executing 'gpumemtimesum' stats report

 Time (%)  Total Time (ns)  Count    Avg (ns)       Med (ns)      Min (ns)     Max (ns)    StdDev (ns)       Operation
 --------  ---------------  -----  -------------  -------------  -----------  -----------  ------------  ------------------
     ......

[8/8] Executing 'gpumemsizesum' stats report

 Total (MB)  Count  Avg (MB)  Med (MB)  Min (MB)  Max (MB)   StdDev (MB)      Operation
 ----------  -----  --------  --------  --------  ---------  -----------  ------------------
     ......

```

The CUDA API Statistics section shows the CUDA API calls that are executed. The CUDA Kernel Statistics lists all the kernels that were executed during the profiling session. There are also more details on the CUDA memory operations (CudaMemcpy) listed.
There are columns corresponding to percentage of time consumed, total time, number of calls, and average/min/max time of those calls. Use **your** `nsys` profiling output corresponding to the section above to answer the questions for your quiz.

You can find more information about `nsys` in the [Nsight Systems Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/#cli-profiling)

***Kernel level profiling using Nsight-Compute***

When doing profiling tasks with Nsight-Compute, modify your SLURM configuration as follows:

```bash
#SBATCH --constraint="projects,perf,nvperf"
```

For regular development and debugging, use the standard configuration:

```bash
#SBATCH --constraint="projects"
```

**Note:** Only use the profiling configuration when actively collecting performance metrics. The `perf,nvperf` constraints instruct Delta to reserve a dedicated 4×A40 node for your job. This ensures that no other processes interfere with profiling but may result in longer wait times for node allocation. Using the standard configuration during development helps maintain resource availability for other cluster users by avoiding unnecessary exclusive node allocation.

Nsight-Systems does not give you detailed kernel level performance metrics. For that, we will need to use `ncu` (Nsight-Compute).

1. Modify `m1_gpu.slurm` to use `ncu` to save some timeline and analysis information.
   ```bash
   srun ncu --set full -f -o analysis_file ./m1_gpu 100 > gpu_ncu.out
   ```
   This generates `analysis_file.ncu-rep`.
2. Download that `.ncu-rep` file locally to open in the **Nsight Compute GUI**.
3. Examine memory behavior, SM efficiency, etc. to find performance bottlenecks.

You can find more information about `ncu` in the [Nsight Compute Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightCompute/index.html)

## 4. Implementing Kernel Fusion

Modify `./project/src/layer/custom/kernel-fusion-forward.cu` to create the kernel fusion implementation of input unrolling.

**Kernel Fusion** fuses the matrix unrolling kernel, the matrix multiplication kernel, and the permutation kernel into **one** kernel. This technique is covered as "Matrix-Multiplication with built-in unrolling" in the lecture. Below is a more detailed explanation of this technique.

The implementation starts with the tiled matrix multiplication kernel. You can refer to your lab3 code or `./project/src/layer/custom/matmul.cu`.
- When loading input elements into shared memory, instead of reading from a pre-unrolled matrix, the kernel directly loads the corresponding elements from the original input feature.
- After computing the output element, the kernel writes it to global memory. At this stage, it directly stores the results in the correct positions, applying the necessary permutation.

The skeleton code is provided, and the places you need to complete are marked with `TODO`.

## 5. Profile Kernel Fusion
Follow the instructions from step 3 (Profiling Basic GPU Convolution and Matrix Unrolling) to profile your fused kernel using Nsight Systems/Compute. Compare the time consumed by the fused version vs. your separate-kernel approach. You will use the profiling results to complete the report.

The sum of Op times on batch_size=10000 should be approximately 60 ms if you implement the fused kernel correctly. To earn full credits on the coding part, you must
- have correct accuracies for any batch size
- achieve total Op time less than 200 ms for batch_size=10000
- use tiled matrix multiplication

We will measure Op times without profiling. When verifying performance, you can use results from non-profiling runs or `nsys` profiling, as `ncu` profiling introduces significant overhead.

## 6. Submitting Milestone 2 for Grading

To submit your work for grading, add, commit, and push your files:

* ```git add -u```
* ```git commit -m "some comment"```
* ```git push origin main```

Do not add profiling results (`.sqlite`, `.nsys-rep`, `.ncu-rep`) to Git. These files are not required for code grading and are often large, potentially exceeding GitHub’s size limit. Including them may prevent you from successfully pushing your commit.

Make sure to complete your quiz on PrairieLearn. Double check you finish all items listed in the Deliverables for this milestone.

The code in your GitHub repository at 8pm on Monday, April 14 will be considered the final version, even if you had a correct version earlier. We will retrieve and grade the code at that time.

## Rubric
| Component | Percentage |
| --------- | ---------: |
| **Unrolling**  |        10% |
| **Fusion**  |        10% |
| **Quiz**  |        15% |


## Appendix

### Checking for Errors

To ensure proper memory management, we must free all allocated memory upon completion fo the program. To avoid memory errors, you can use `compute-sanitizer`, a tool provided by NVIDIA to catch memory bugs. It succeeds the now-deprecated `CUDA-memcheck` tool.
To check for memory errors in the Milestone 1 GPU binary, update your slurm script to include the following command. For other milestones, change the binary name accordingly:
```
srun compute-sanitizer m1_gpu 100 > m1_gpu.out
```
